### Architecture Components: Room

#### Content
***
Working directly with SQLite databases in Android has several drawbacks.

1. You have to write a lot of boilerplate code;
2. You have to implement the object mapping for every query you write;
3. It's difficult to implement database migrations;
4. It's hard to test the database;
5. And if you are not careful, you can easily do long-running operations on the main thread.

To solve these problems, we created Room, a persistent library that provides an abstraction layer over SQLite. Here is what you need to know to start using Room in your apps. Let's say you want to have a table of users, and you want every row of the table to be an instance of the User class. You need to annotate your class with @Entity, define the tableName, the @PrimaryKey and the @ColumnInfo. Room will take care of the creation of the user table for you. 

```java
@Entity(tableName = "users")
public class User {
	@PrimaryKey
	@ColumnInfo(name = "user_id")
	private int id;

	@ColumnInfo(name = "name")
	private String name;

	... //other column info

	public User(int id, String name, ...) {
		this.id = id;
		this.name = name;
		...
	}
}
```

To access the data in the database, use data access object, @Dao for short. You need to create an interface annotated with @Dao, where you declare all the methods needed to work with the database and write the corresponding SQL statements. Room will take care of implementing these methods for you and running each of them in a single transaction. Room supports insert, update, delete and query. The SQL statements are checked at compile time, meaning that if you write invalid query, you will find this out immediately.

```java
@Dao
public interface UserDao {
	@Insert
	void insert(User user);

	@Delete
	int deleteAll(User[] users);

	@Update
	int update(User user);

	@Query("SELECT * FROM users " + " WHERE name LIKE :name")
	List<User> findUsersByName(String name);
}
```

The class that puts together the entities and the daos is RoomDatabase. Create an abstract class that extends RoomDatabase, annotate it, delcare the entities and corresponding Daos.

```java
@Database(entities = {User.class}, version = 1)
abstract class MyDatabase extends RoomDatabase {
	public abstract UserDao getUserDao();
}
```

Let's take a close look at the queries. All of these queries are synchronous, meaning that they will be running on the same thread you are triggering them from. If that's a main thread, your app will crash with illegalStateException(Cannot access database on the main thread since it may potentially lock the UI for a long period of time). So use your prefered methods of handling threads in Android and make sure you are off the main thread. Room also supports asynchronous queries when working with LiveData and RxJava. Even more, the queries that return LiveData or Flowable objects are observable queries, meaning that you will get notified every time the data in the table updates. Whenever you alter your database schema either because you've added or renamed a new column or table, you will need to tell Room how to handle these changes. To do that, in your database class, you need to first update your database version. Secondly, implement the migration class that defines how to handle the migration from the old to the new version. And thirdly, add that migration as a parameter in the database builder. After triggering the migrations, Room will validate the schema for you to ensure the migration was done correctly.

```java
@Database(entities = {User.class}, version = 2)
abstract class MyDatabase extends RoomDatabase {
	public abstract UserDao getUserDao();

	static final Migration MIGRATION_1_2 = new Migration(1, 2) {
		@Override
		public void migrate(SupportSQLiteDatabase database) {
			database.execSQL("ALTER TABLE users " + " ADD COLUMN address STRING");
		}
	};
}

Room.databaseBuilder(context.getApplicationContext(), MyDatabase.class, "Sample.db")
	.addMigrations(MIGRATION_1_2)
	.build();
```

So we have entities, daos, database and migrations, how do we test them? To test a DAO, you need to implement AndroidJUnit test that creates an in-memory database. That in-memory database will hold the data only for as long as the process is alive, meaning that after every test, the database will be cleared.

```java
@RunWith(AndroidJUnit4.class)
public class UserDaoTest {
	private MyDatabase database;
	@Before
	public void initDb() throws Exception {
		database = Room.inMemoryDatabaseBuilder(InstrumentationRegistry.getContext(), MyDatabase.class).build();
	}

	@After
	public void closeDb() throws Exception {
		database.close();
	}
}
```

To test asynchronous queries, add a test rule InstantTaskExecutorRule to execute each task synchronously. 

```java
@RunWith(AndroidJUnit4.class)
public class UserDaoTest {
	@Rule
	public InstantTaskExecutorRule rule = new InstantTaskExecutorRule();
}
```

In your app implementation, you will end up referencing the Daos in other classes. To unit test those classes, just mock the Dao with the help of frameworks like Mockito. Here is another tip. Extend the CountingTaskExecutorRule and use it in an Espresso test to count the tasks as they start and finish.

```java
public class UsersRepository {
	private final UserDao userDao;

	public UsersRepository(UserDao userDao) {
		this.userDao = userDao;
	}
}

public class UsersRepositoryTest {
	private UserDao userDao = mock(UserDao.class);

	private UsersRepository repository;

	@Before
	public void setUp() throws Exception {
		repository = new UsersRepository(userDao);
	}
}
```

Finally, don't forget to test the migrations. We have another handy test rule for this, the MigrationTestHelper. This class allows you to create the database in an older version and run the validate migrations. All you need to do is to check that the data you inserted in the older version is also present after migration. 

```java
@Rule
public MigrationTestHelper testHelper = 
	new MigrationTestHelper(InstrumentationRegistry.getInstrumentation(), MyDatabase.class.getCanonicalName(), new FrameworkSQLiteOpenHelperFactory());
```

So less boilerplate code, compile-time checked queries, ease of implementing migrations, high degress of testability and keeping database work away from the main thread, all of these qualities of Room make working with the database easier and pleasant, helping you deliver better apps.

#### Reference
***
[Youtube Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H7I3zs-L-1w)

